---
title: The Myth of Great Managers
date: 2024-05-15
description: What people get wrong about managers and individual contributors.
---

Most companies assume that management ability and individual contributor ability
are separate skillets that don't really correlate with each other (and are
perhaps slightly negatively correlated).

For example, people assume that the software engineers who are the best at
writing code won't necessarily be the best at managing other software engineers.
The best designers won't necessarily make the best design managers. The best
accountants won't make the best accounting managers. And so on.

As a result, this is how most companies end up thinking about talent:

![A venn diagram showing bad management practices.](/bad-venn-diagram.png)

Most companies assume even if this venn diagram overlaps a bit, the circles are
mostly separate. Some people are great individual contributors, and others are
great managers. It's rare to be both, and if you're neither, you might want to
start looking for another job!

It's the "great" managers who go on to occupy leadership positions, while the
individual contributors usually stay individual contributors. This is especially
common in software engineering, where the "management track" is explicitly
separated from the "individual contributor" track.

Other job functions may not make this distinction explicit, but you'll see it
play out if you work long enough in corporate America. The people who ascend the
management ranks and become directors, VPs, and CxOs almost always do so because
of their (perceived) management abilities, not usually because they are
excellent at their craft, whatever that may be.

But actually, this misunderstands what makes a great manager. A great manager
must be _both_ a great manager _and_ a great individual contributor. It's true
that just because you're a great individual contributor doesn't also mean that
you'll be a great manager.

However, the one thing I'm certain of is that if you aren't a great individual
contributor, **it is impossible for you to be a great manager**. Let me repeat
that another way. There is no such thing as someone who's a subpar individual
contributor but a good manager. To be a great manager, you must _first_ be a
great individual contributor.

But don't just take my word for it. Here's what three of the greatest CEOs in
history have to say about it:

> I think that every leader should be an expert in what theyâ€™re leading. There
> should be no people managers in the entire company.

_- Brian Chesky_

> You know who the best managers are? They're the great individual contributors
> who never, ever want to be a manager, but decide they have to be a manager,
> because no one else is going to be able to do as good a job as them.

_- Steve Jobs_

> I strongly believe that all managers in a technical area must be technically
> excellent. Managers in software must write great software or it's like being a
> cavalry captain who can't ride a horse!

_- Elon Musk_

These great CEOs all agree that the best managers are also great individual
contributors. What I would add, however, is that being a great individual
contributor is not enough to be a great manager. It is necessary, but not
sufficient.

A great manager must also be, well, a great manager. She must know how to hire,
fire, promote, communicate, organize, and galvanize. And it's true that many
people who are excellent individual contributors lack those skills.

So corporate America is correct that being a great individual contributor does
not necessarily make someone a great manager. But they draw from this the wrong
conclusion. They assume that this means that it's being a great manager is
simply separate from being a great individual contributor, and that you can do
one without the other.

But this is wrong, because actually the venn diagram looks like this:

![A venn diagram showing good management practices.](/good-venn-diagram.png)

To summarize: Only some individual contributors are great managers, but all
great managers are great individual contributors.

It is those rare individual who have both gifts - who are both great at their
craft _and_ talented leaders - who should lead your company if you want to
succeed.
